hello maths fans i'm once again here
with my many many guests
who you may recognize from the recent
game show edition
that we just filmed in fact and the math
appeal team
bobby and susan over there on the end
were very very keen
to chat to our countdown stars james and
kai
and so we thought let's all sit down and
chat
maths basically
[Music]
countdown as a show is um a regular show
that people see where mata's in it
and so they kind of you know it's a way
in for many people
and uh we just like wanted to know
because a lot of people kind of get
scared by it
you know just thinking about mental math
stuff and actually it's been really
great fun
recording it today you know and watching
you in action
and the two of you are quite nominal
honestly you're like they're a bit hot
like these numbers
legends uh you know what i mean so it's
kind of we'd love to
find out from you you know like some of
your
trade secrets and also find out how you
got involved
how did you get into canada well
actually my brother was on canton before
i was
so he went on when he was about 16
because he was big into scrabble
and so he was in the sort of weird game
scene
[Laughter]
so he'd gone on a little bit before i
had and
yeah it seemed like
i mean we used to sit around watching it
you know coming from school it was at 4
30 in the afternoon in those days yeah
yeah and that's the camera
when was your walk that's right but yeah
so we used to come back and you know eat
frosties or whatever after school in
front of the tv and
um and yes and how do you get into it
guys
i've sort of supposedly i've i've been
watching countdown from like a very
young age my mum says i
i was watching it was about two or three
and i was like learning the letters
numbers from countdown apparently yeah
um so
i started picking it up and then i'd
watch it most days i guess
and just kept picking up my knowledge
kept you know
developing tips and tricks stuff like
that
and it really got me interested in maths
and numbers
and um even the letter side is quite
mathematical with the way
all uh all the anagrams the way it all
works together um
so it really really sort of peaked my
interest for um
the mathy side of things and yeah i just
just took it from there
really like what are your tips on how to
go about
say working out the letters because both
of you have done working out
and it was really interesting to see it
because it's like watching different
people's minds work
um so so what is your strategy when
you're given
the letters and have you got your
working out i mean yeah
i could see that there were different
things going on with both of you
actually mine's quite mine's quite
minimalist really i just write the
letters out um
and then the first start is always
looking for common um
prefixes and suffixes so common common
bits you
put at the start or the end of the word
i mean this first round here
we had ing which is like that's that's a
staple of countdown really yeah that's
like the first thing you look out for
yeah and then that's already three
letters so all you're doing is looking
for shorter letters in the rest of the
words
um and so it's little things like that
um common common starting common endings
and then i'd always start low so
the first word you see whatever it is
just write it down because then you've
got something on the board
and then you progressively go okay can i
get something in one little longer can i
get something a little longer
um and yeah it's it's quite interesting
how it all sort of
scrambles around in my head um and you
see all these
different avenues you can take um
i saw you james actually doing basically
what kyle's just said
of writing down short words but you were
doing it as the letters were going on
the board
yeah if you're not the one choosing the
letters you can sometimes like write
them down in a different order or write
them down in their words
and sometimes another quite nice thing
it's quite nice to sometimes see the
same nine letters in a different order
so you know if you get like a five
letter word you can also just write the
remaining four letters alongside it and
then you've
got you just see it and see see
different combinations
yeah i've i've had some people will
write the letters in a square instead as
well we've seen that i've seen friends
do that obviously a circle or a square
yeah
put it in a three by three group because
because i mean you already have the
letters in that order on the board so
one are writing down a different order
as you say
um and sometimes that helps people
scramble the letters up a bit
like you see people playing scrabble who
are always like yes switching the lights
around
the right and then you could put the ing
together or you could put the est
together or whatever it is
yeah yeah um but it is interesting how
everyone does it in a different way i
think
it's um it's really quite cool to look
into here
so but just a key thing just to get
started and write some stuff down
yes yeah i think i think as i say as
soon as you've got a word scribble it
down because then that's a confidence
please
yeah exactly in terms of the show you
always just like if your brain just
freezes
at least if you saw a 500 word in the
first two seconds right then
you know you've got something do you get
moments of brain freeze where you like
how that panic
oh god my mind's completely in shock
right now or
i think i think i have one or two
because i was i was quite young
obviously when i first did it
i don't think i had the full range of
emotions
i was barely nervous at all it just it
was just sort of quite natural
he's like the other footballer as they
break into the scene they're 16 17
that rooney had his best days and he was
like 17 18
and 10 years later he's a more
accomplished player but actually some of
his best stuff was like in 17 18.
exactly yeah he's not seeing the best of
cards
[Music]
ask him about when he came back on the
show
i got invited back a couple of times
they do these um they
can't do these tournaments every few
years where they gather up all the
contestants in the last few years who
have sort of
done extremely well or they've picked
public interest or something
and i guess so i got invited back to a
couple of them and i i lost
heavily i lost the first tournament i
did i then got
a special episode which was just a
one-off which i lost
and um i then got invited back for
another tournament which is the 30th
birthday so that would have been
in 2012 and i lost my first show again
on that
so it's it's it's not been uh quite as
glamour as a record since i think
it's definitely we sort of forget about
those ones just remember
remember me when i was back when let me
think about
like um the numbers could be quite cool
to hear like how you work
through those because definitely with
the 952
you blew the mind of like cal waterman
as well as everyone else
how can you put calvary so how like how
do you think about working those out
well i mean they're just i guess lots of
different ways to approach it with lots
of different so
for example we had one with six from the
six small numbers yeah
and trying to work that one out feels
really different to trying to work out
one with four big numbers
because the kind of tricks you've got
the kind of
operations you could do feel completely
different if you've got six more numbers
it's just first a challenge just to get
anywhere near
um can you get anywhere near it and then
try and adjust what you've you know
maybe you can find a way to multiply
four numbers together
it's kind of close and then you can try
and adjust a little bit
um whereas i think with the four big
numbers maybe there are more
i don't know sort of particular
strategies that you might have kind of
played with before you know how the four
big numbers work with each other
uh so so does that mean like so are you
like really adept with then
like both like 25 75 50
and 100 like are you kind of do you see
how they like fit together
and you like or already have like
well-versed
kind of strategies for them yeah i think
a bit yeah you know i mean
there are there are definitely some
things like for you you can work out
what you can get which is those four
numbers alone for example oh really
you can get to there's one nice thing is
you can get to six to five
with 64. with just the 25 to 50 75 or
just the 25 for 75 and 100
just by doing 25-25 and kind of
surprisingly often okay yeah that is
going to get you somewhere near
you know that with the other you might
get somewhere near just you know if you
can't think of anything else that
that might start you off did you much
prep beforehand obviously you must have
done a bit but like
did you kind of get into you know
strategies of like
being top of your game for certain
things like did you do much training i
did with the numbers i did with the
letters
um i didn't much and so when i was on
the show this was back in the 90s when
there wasn't so much
on the web in terms of like you know
practice letters
numbers games but i did um write a
little program that
solved the numbers game and like
practice against that and actually just
seeing you know you try
puzzle you can't get it or you get it
one way and then the computer tells you
another way of getting it
um and it like shows you what you're
like how could i it looks really
sometimes it looks really impossible
you're like how could i possibly have
worked that out myself and then you
actually say oh okay maybe when you get
underneath it it's that you can break
that down into a
series of steps you're like okay
actually you could have thought that up
in advance and it helps you then for
other questions yeah
kind of so what about you kids do you
similar thing or we said like
did you write a program uh i mean it's
funny
i studied maths and computer science at
uni and in first year of computer
science we did actually write a numbers
solver for countdown
um yeah was it because you were in the
club
especially i don't walk around with like
a bandage
so that was really interesting i mean
you did it obviously a while before us
uh but it was really interesting
learning how that works and for me with
the
with the maths i think a lot of it is
practice you mentioned um
the times tables and stuff like that
well one of the um one of the
questions we had um in our other episode
was um
i i worked at 975 was 75 times 13.
and that's um that's just something that
i know straight away because it's just
sort of ingrained
in me now yeah uh on that has it been
ingrained by repeated exposure or have
you sat down and learned
the 75 tables the 25 tables i think it's
just most
mostly repeated exposure yeah um if you
watch countdown enough
yeah you're going to see a lot of
multiplications by 75.
but i mean definitely for me at the time
it went on i would not have thought
a millisecond about 13 times 75.
now now i have to like yeah or 7.75 or
something there's some there's some
process that i didn't used to have to go
through there so it wasn't
too rusty now so it's automated then
that those things some of those things
at the time were just like
yeah yeah right okay and that's really
interesting because i think um
for our students they often say ours you
know we want to be creative with maths
but you need a
bedrock of fundamental skills like for
example
once you know that 13 times 75 is 975
then you can be creative with the other
numbers there yeah but if you haven't
got that then it's going to be difficult
to get right up there
and i think i think it's so easy to pick
it up with practice like
the great thing about countdown is the
skills are so repeatable
if you just do several rounds of numbers
you'll get you'll get
different solutions each time obviously
but it's the same skills
and you just keep picking it up and
picking it up and
eventually justice become natural i
think that's really interesting what you
said bobby about
and it really applies to doing maths
more generally as well you have some
kind of thing that
when you're first doing you have to
think through each step and then
gradually that thing becomes more
and more like one single idea in your
head and it becomes like a box and then
that box can be
part of something level up you know that
box is then one component of
a method you're using one level higher
than that and that for me i mean that
keeps happening through school math
through university mastery research it's
it's really just this idea of something
that used to be
a difficult thing that you had to think
through becomes a natural idea that then
just one idea that goes into another
thing i think i think that's something
that a lot of people
who kind of get scared about math or
think about the numbers around and get
really worried they presume it's like a
magic trick
and actually what's happened is the
people doing it have practiced it a lot
and they've got to kind of understand
and remember things quickly which makes
it
easier to do more complex things and i
think as you say i think the key's
practice
you know and it's not it isn't magic
i mean it's working it's fundamentally
work it's it's kind of creative it's fun
i think as well it's kind of
when i'm doing it i find it creative
enough that it's it's fun to do at the
time it's not it doesn't feel like
you're just
uh someone in tricks that you already
know some somehow it's kind of um
it's a really nice level of sort of
elementary enough but still kind of
creative that feels that feels fun to do
did you do just one game or how did it
kind of work were you in that quite a
lot
because i mean you did eight you won
eight consecutive games right so how did
it work
that was only filmed over two days um
they filmed
five shows a day is there is there a
standard output yeah
um i think i think what sort of is quite
unusual for some shows is that countdown
doesn't take any
longer to film than you actually see on
the tv
um so the episode lasts about 45 50
minutes
it only takes about an hour to shoot so
you can just do that
yeah the the celebs go get there get
their makeup done get their
clothes changed you know of course and
you guys will you get your
clothes changed you'd have a different
yeah they'd have yeah have a different
shirt
yes we'd have to bring at least five
outfits to the studio and this was
before we'd ever been on so you have no
idea how well you're gonna do
and they say you got you've gotta bring
at least five there's no way i'm gonna
need
five outfits
which was quite bizarre but yeah it was
it was quite a full-on day
i remember by the eighth one which was
the fifth of the day so i did three on
the first day five and the second by the
end
of my run i was absolutely exhausted um
it was it was quite accurate it's quite
full-on but there's just
so many emotions as well like of relief
of like just joy i guess that
uh it i mean it wasn't it wasn't about
you at all it was fantastic
it's such a lovely experience yeah and
it is tiring to do lots but also you're
kind of getting used to it while of
course there's a new
your opponent's a new person coming in
every time yeah so you're kind of there
is a nice feeling of like i kind of
belong in this scene
yes do you think that helped do you
think it actually was was
you found it easier when you had that
repeat yeah i definitely think your
first game is harder because you're
getting used to
you know where everything is and how
everything sounds and yeah so to come in
and win you're almost like
you're coming as the underdog in most
cases like
on the first one yes yes because the
other person has been there a few times
yeah and so and you can get really
unlucky i mean if you come in in your
first game and you're just against
some um some person who's really good
and is really well set
but you guys yeah
and that's and that's it that's your
countdown career over really
which is such a shame do you have any
really close ones yeah
when you were like could have no longer
my my second show my second show
i was two points behind on the conundrum
and i remember i was
kind of like just
almost identically same sort of pressure
on me um but luckily i got that
conundrum quite quickly what was that
this the the scramble was mud temple
i'll give you a couple of seconds um
yeah i managed to manage to get it um
and i was a nervous wreck but
luckily it worked out i need to see that
i need to see it in front of me
[Music]
[Laughter]
do you remember or were you just i
certainly had close ones i don't
remember now whether there were close
ones in the first eight there probably
were i don't remember i definitely the
ones i really remember
were maybe the close ones that i lost in
like the semi-final after that
um where i lost it on the conundrum
there was a number that i needed to get
and i didn't get
like the same same situation and that
feels like
actually the worst situation where
you're behind and if no one gets it you
go out and that's what happened that
neither of us got it yeah
so it was in your hands but yeah what
was the word elusive word
it was a difficult one that the word was
dreamboat
yeah so so my brother the scrabble
player was um
sitting in the audience watching that
was the first time you'd come to watch
actually
and um afterwards i was like uh did you
see it yeah
he's like if i was there i don't want it
i mean he is much much better than me
you know um about that uh that that
semi-final you had i had basically
the same but like the other way around
um my quarter final
i was i was ahead for the conundrum and
those
30 seconds counting down knowing that if
they buzz in
you're out i had to wait 30 seconds i
was nowhere near the answer the answer
was laserdisc which i didn't know was
one word yes um those 30 seconds
felt like an hour or two it was just so
difficult
um they really do know how to how to get
hit
attention you hear the music the
countdown yeah yeah that's uh that's
going on just behind you uh on the clock
it's it's not very loud but you can
definitely notice it it's enough to
if you're already a bit shaky it's
enough to make you go
whoa but it's also good because it times
it for you you know when you're
yes you know when you're just coming to
the end and yeah yeah i think it helped
me that having
that behind me i think that helped with
uh when i said earlier when i was
writing down small words to start with
because you always know
as you say you've been you know how long
you've got left and you've got that
pressure up against you so
it's important to just just get
something down and it makes it feel a
bit more like it was at home i mean
that's the other thing
yes if it hadn't been the music in the
studio you know you're used to that when
you're watching on tv so
it's quite nice practicing at home with
your notepad
put your pencil behind your ear i really
wish i could like bottle
like your both your kind of relaxedness
to the idea of kind of
games and problem solving because like
it's one of those things i think those
of our students have real
issues with you know there's a problem
like in a question or something and
they're like debilitated because they're
worried about getting it wrong
and actually the thing is just get
started and you know and enjoy the
process of like
working stuff out and have a bit of a
play and you know
think it through like it's just it's
quite nice to think of
problem solving is playful which i don't
think we hear very often because i think
people get worried about the timing you
know over 30 seconds like and then they
just sort of
freak out and it's like actually relax
it's cool
take your time it's you know having have
a play write some stuff down which
is like something we would like more
people to understand it's okay to just
have a go
yeah and i think at all levels of math
it's a really really good thing to
encourage it's actually funny because
sometimes
you get the impression sometimes that
people get worse at it when they learn
more
i sometimes find that with with kind of
with the students i teach i've
sort of maybe asked them a question um
and they're like i can't think of what
what piece of knowledge i've got that
that i can apply to this you know what
method is there
and i feel like if i'd asked you this
two years ago you actually would have
like oh this is a really interesting
problem i can
choice they have some too many methods
in their hand right that's right they
think that there should be
a set thing that applies procedure
maybe before they knew they'd not seen
it but anything like it before in their
lives and
at that point you can like uh you know
yeah you could just roll your sleeves up
and really
really try dig in so keeping that um
openness to just
like you say just you know start with
anything and get your hands dirty and
play around with it and see what see
what comes out that's really important
it's been really refreshing to to hear
you know i mean kind of it's
like as i said it's just really nice to
speak to people who are
seen as like legends
and just be like oh oh you have to
scribble stuff down on paper too
became legends because they they had a
problem but they're
worried about like devaluing of meanings
of words
[Laughter]
but it used to
thank you again well to everybody
to go in order thank you bobby and susan
from the matapeel team
what you're doing is awesome as we know
i love what you do we like to work
together these days so
keep doing what you're doing james and
kai thank you so much for
sharing your knowledge and for taking
part in our countdown themed video i
hope everyone's enjoyed watching
and uh please do subscribe to my channel
for more
maths fun and i'll see you all soon
we're waving now
you